Automation is the application of Automatic devices or Logic to assist the operation of Canal Systems.
Irrigation projects in Kerala are, in general, designed to serve the second (Oct-Dec) and third (Jan-Mar)
crops. However, they are unable to serve the third crop fully due to non-availability of water and poor
condition of canals. Automation of canals, through Centralized Control Algorithms, will result in
savings of large quantities of water, which can be utilized for the third crop. Corresponding
revenue that can be generated is approximately Rs 1000 crores. Kerala has a wide network of river,
rivulets and springs spread over the entire cropped area. Out of the net cropped area of the state only 18
percent is irrigated. The net area irrigated had declined from 3.99 lakh hectors during 2005-06 to 3.85
lakh hectors in the year 2006-07. The major source of irrigation is wells (30 percent), government
canals (26 percent), tanks (11 percent) and private canals (1.125 percent) respectively. Irrigation
development in Kerala is mainly centered on the development of surface water resources through
construction of major and minor irrigation projects. About 60 to 70 percent of the investment in each
plan of the state was earmarked for major and medium irrigation. The overall water use efficiency of a
manually operated system, exclusive of the use of any return flow, seldom exceeds 40 percent. It is
reasonable to expect an increase of the overall efficiency of about 10 percent or more for a system
with some automation. The advantages of automation are not limited to savings in operation cost and in
water. It also alleviates the risk of water logging. A further advantage is that it increases the reliability
and accuracy of water distribution. This contributes to the establishment of a climate of confidence
between the operating authority and the farmers, which in turn contributes to the effective organization
of water user groups and their participation in operation and maintenance activities.With automation, it
may also be possible to accurately know the volume of water delivered to individuals or groups of
farmers.
